# Nerd Pride

On the evening of December 8, 2016, exactly on 5:01 PM in Eastern Standard Time, the photons of
Cornell Engineering acceptance letter struck my eyes. For me, it was a confirmation, a confirmation
for an unexpected success of a rebellion.

<!--truncate-->

I can imagine what would happen if things were the other way around. There would have been some
discussions in teachers' office. "Another failed example, just like John Shi two years ago,"
commented Mr. Alpha. John was the leader of the student union, founder, and president of the robotic
club and a film-making club. He got the perfect score in IB, 45 out of 45. He graduated from my high
school two years ago, with offers only from HMC and UC Berkeley. Although HMC and UCB are two
schools out of reach for many students, it should be the safety school for him. His failure
foreshadowed this year's college admission in our school, especially Class of 2017 generally less
fond of humanities than sciences.

When I heard John's story, I was only in tenth grade, enrolled in the high school for just one
semester. Rumors began to spread. Our school was generally perceived by outsiders as a school of
excellent extracurricular activities. It was indeed true. Besides tens of student organizations in
our school, the school also help organized a trip to Dabie Mountain for teaching poor children and
tree planting activities in Inner Mongolia. Also, some of the great students can even organize some
activities that attract media attention, for example, the annual charity. However, it was just one
side of the story. Its implication had put great disadvantages on students like me. The logic is
simple: they are only good at extracurricular activities; they are poor in math and sciences. You
can argue, or even protest, but before protests become effective, it is a fact, no matter if it is
an acceptable one. Now, it seems like the already bleak future of my college admission future was
added another opaque layer of uncertainty.

## 1. From Undecided to Determined

About the same time, it was also a time of decision and determination. After a semester of
exploration in the school, I became a member of CCC, a programming club, and a member of the student
union in the publicity department, or MiniTrue in NewSpeak. I also participated in Stanford Math
Tournament with 7 other students in Grade 11. Three of the group members, Henry, Ben, and Lily,
strongly recommended me to join the club of Computerization which devoted to developing an online
platform to serve all the students. Due to increasing time constraints thanks to the evil College
Board, I can only afford to choose one of them. I already became bored with and decided to leave
CCC, which only creates computer animations. Therefore, I had to choose between Computerization, a
club of nowhere but I liked, and student union, a "student" organization of everywhere but I had an
unpleasant history with.

I disliked the student union for a few reasons, one of which is the difference between expectation
and reality. The expectation from the Gettysburg Address told me that the union should be of the
students, by the students, for the students, but the harsh reality speaks for itself that the union
is of the school, by the establishment, for the elites. I did not experience the early history of it
when innovation is still abundant or possible. I was admitted in the school when the student union
was in its fourth year when many innovations in the earlier time were repeatedly proven successful
so they became mandatory. As a result, the delegates in the union were too preoccupied with these
established sequences of events, ignoring possible new innovation. When I was admitted the member of
the student union, I wrote a lengthy letter to the head of MiniTrue, describing a possible platform
for the publicity as well as for the discussion of all the students. I recommended the use of
machine learning algorithm based on students' discussion that could not only target students of
different interest more effectively, but also guide future activities planning. The plan was
acclaimed and was only acclaimed. I never heard of any mention of it until I submitted my
resignation letter. If ignorance of technology was slightly better than bearable, then the betrayal
was intolerable. One month before the annual charity event, I was asked to update the charity
website that served to sell the tickets. I thought that it was a great opportunity to demonstrate my
programming skills and to have a say in the department. When I devoted hours to it and upgraded it
with flat and responsive design, I received the instruction on the class monitor meeting: please
recommend students to buy tickets via class monitor instead of the website so that the paying
service provider can share less revenue. Once again, technology was ignored.

However, I was not an idealist. If I were, I would quit when they first ignored my plan. The power
and resources of the student union are highly desirable when you want to organize some activities
and events. At that moment, Computerization was still in its infancy. Nobody in my class has ever
heard of it, nor does it have any real influence in the school. It is doubtful whether it can have
even 10% of the momentum compared to that of the student union. Idealism defeated pragmatism when I
decided to bring a new club into prominence. Pragmatism defeated idealism when I gave up the title
of student union member to have the real power to make the change. When I first joined, they were
trying to promote a modified version of Moodle to serve the homework assigning website. I persuaded
them to replace it with a self-developed platform and spent about two months to create it, which we
later named SAM, System of Assignment Management. With another year of work, SAM expanded to have
40% of student population and Computerization trained grouped the best software engineers on the
campus into a great team. Now that I am looking back into the history, I found that the casual
moment when we finally decided the name of the platform is SAM is actually the ritualistic moment
when my idiosyncrasy had been merged into the club. By the end of June, when the old leaders Henry
and Ben were ready to concede the leadership to me, SAM was already a Sam project in which I
contributed 99.9% of the code. The most intensive work of the club has been transformed from
promoting an existing project to constantly making great things to surprise the world. That shift in
the workflow is indicative of the shift in attitude. Sam was no longer a businessman, he became an
engineer; Computerization was no longer an activist group; it became a research and development
organization. We no longer cared about the actual statistics of active users; we cared about the
quality of our service and the difficulty of the research project.

![SAM on GitHub](/img/2016-12-30-nerd-pride/sam-on-github.png) SAM on GitHub

Concurrent with the fundamental change in Computerization, there was an ongoing battle: mathematical
modeling. It started when I signed up for HiMCM 2015 in 2014 fall and started to teach myself
calculus, but intensified when Calin, Tim and Samuel and I took a formal preparation course starting
from basic mathematics and tutorials of MATLAB ending with some smart algorithms that we ended up
using. Now with the advantage of hindsight, I can argue that the experience in Computerization and
mathematical modeling shaped my nerdy life, and gave me the sense of Nerd Pride.

![All the Math Books I Have](/img/2016-12-30-nerd-pride/math-books.png) All the Math Books I Have

Before these activities, I was highly unsure about my future. Instead of a concrete plan, for
example, for the training of a future software engineer, I only had some vague ideas: probably some
position in Google, probably in a startup company, etc. I even did not exclude the chance of being
the founder of a startup myself, just like mostly what I did in Computerization. The harsh reality
in user statistics pushed me to the other side. While we were promoting our platform, teachers liked
it and forgot it; therefore, the user coverage was always around 40%. In the 11th grade when I was
fully in charge of the club, I always wanted to throw me into earlier times when all I needed to do
was to solve complex technical problems one after another. I became increasingly aware of that I am
an engineer, not a salesman or businessman. I am the one who builds great products but not
necessarily has excellent skills to promote them. The success and failure of HiMCM even strengthened
by belief. I was able to incorporate all different mathematical and computer science knowledge,
including multivariable calculus, statistics, linear algebra and genetic algorithm to analyze and
optimize the traffic on highway, but eventually failed in terms of presentation when later proofread
of the thesis suggests that our writing may lead others to believe we only tangentially solve the
road rage problem required in the question set. We got Honorable Mentioned, which is only better
than Successful Participant, a prize that everyone excluding cheaters can obtain.

It is confirmed. Sam is a nerd, not the type of businessman favored by the school.

## 2. From Silent to Outright

With the nerdy spirit awakening, I found increasing uneasiness with my old ally-turned-opponent, the
student union. The student union held its indirect election in May, via electoral college from
almost randomly chosen electors to decide committee of the next generation. It would not result in
the disagreement between electoral college vote and popular vote because the latter concept does not
exist. The nomination process was controlled by the school itself, which involves some opaque
backroom dealings that sometimes surprise all the participants. As a result, there is no third-party
(or even second-party) nominees or independent candidates. The final decision is also hilarious:
electors choose 10 from 12, which means that a school-approved candidate has 83.3% chance of
winning. I witnessed both the student union election and the US presidential election. I also
witnessed the decline of their quality. Excellent promotional videos were replaced by perfunctorily
made propaganda; professional lectures from academia were reduced to dogmatic teaching of success
theory; more importantly, work was rebooted into talks, mere talks on incomprehensible prose with
unsubstantiated substance on ambitious daydreams. Once they invited a famous guy to give a lecture
on his successful life. In order to obtain a satisfactory statistics, they forced all the student
leaders to attend and disguised it as club president training to trick more. Half a year later when
they were summarizing their jobs, they unashamedly claimed that they were guided by the unchanging
glorious ambitions.

It turns out that there is a high correlation between being a minister in the student union and
being a manager in the student film. There is even a stronger correlation between being a minister
in the student union and majoring in economics or other social sciences. If my personal failure in
Computerization and mathematical modeling had already blocked that path for me, the actions of the
student union had destroyed the reputations of those areas. I was only left with one choice,
engineering. I chose it and I chose it with pride and determination. I felt that I had a built-in
nerdy spirit, but previously, it was private and silent. However, it was the time for a change.

After the first term of the 11th grade, I made the first choice: the type of summer program. Many of
the students went to the summer program to have a university, leadership, or just a party
experience. The content they have learned, on the other hand, may not be very important. It is
mostly evident from the sharing of their experience after the summer holidays. While I talked a lot
about the math I had learned, they were talking about how hard they had worked and thus a wonderful
university experience well bounded by expectation. I was not fully aware of the negative side of
generic university summer programs, but at the time of the application, I simply found math programs
were far more interesting than those which admission depended on some random essays, useless
recommendation letters or even nothing. The math programs that I applied all required a written test
of competence. While essays are required, they were mostly used as tie breaker according to my
speculation, because I did so bad in essays but excellent in math tests. Not only did the
mathematical questions presented in the tests interesting and worth a bad sleep for consideration,
but also the test itself was a reflection of my own philosophy: shut up and show me your work.
Finally, I went to MathILy to spend five weeks deep into abstract mathematics that most businessmen
never hear of: fractal, topology, complex analysis, etc.

![The Most Interesting Question of MathILy Admission Exam](/img/2016-12-30-nerd-pride/math-problems.png)
The Most Interesting Question of MathILy Admission Exam

On March 11, the triumph from the old era eventually arrived: I finally obtained 2310 in the old
SAT. Suddenly, I became free of any major standardized test and was unexpectedly granted tons of
time for independent exploration. Others discouraged me to even to touch the boundary of online
activity analysis due to its tremendous difficulty. True, the time cannot be wasted or I would lose
an edge in college admission process. What an excellent and snobbish wisdom! I once again rebelled
against the convention and chose to follow my heart. It all comes from an incident three years ago
in middle school.

In the middle school, the gossip was flagrant. There is one guy, who I preferred to call Mr. Beta
for the sake of privacy, who was very good at psychological analysis. Sam was exactly the opposite,
but with an additional knowledge of computer science. He claimed that he could know whatever I
thought. I was unwilling to admit my apparent failure, so I responded: my computer can. The childish
verbal exchange of fire would sink into the unknown corners of history very soon if happened
elsewhere, but not for me. The claim was not entirely unsubstantiated: Google Brian learned what is
a cat without any human interference; machine learning was developing fast and violently; artificial
intelligence was on its rise. The only, but tremendous, difficulty for me was to apply the current
development in the fields to the analysis of online activity to achieve a similar result of facial
expression analysis.

The incident occurred in the summer of eighth grade. Then it was a year of deadly preparation for
High School Entrance Exam that nearly killed me. In tenth grade at the high school when I had not
yet overwhelmed by SAT, I taught myself calculus to build a mathematical foundation for that work. A
year later when I finally conquered the SAT, and when I was rich in mathematics after the training
for mathematical modeling, I was ready to re-take the challenge. Neural networks, activation
functions, regularization, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, long-short-term
memory, etc. Tons of new words flowed through my mind. It was like figuring out the core of calculus
without the knowledge of the sine function: imagination, guess work, and inevitable limitation. But
in June, the clouds were clear when my neural network predicts the future evolution of interests
with an 88% accuracy. The job is done.

![Code for Constructing Convolutional Neural Networks in Research](/img/2016-12-30-nerd-pride/ml-code.png)
Code for Constructing Convolutional Neural Networks in Research

I had spent most of my life being a lonely nerd, but at MathILy, nerds rule. All the silent nerds at
school became outright. We talked about mathematics instead of stupid fashion or latest gossips. We
were sad for bugs in our proofs instead for a decline in popularity. We made fun of others' name by
relating them to mathematical definitions. We all laughed when someone was secretly using second
order ordinary differential equation just to find the generating function for Fibonacci sequence. It
was the greatest time. All the social norms were gone and replaced by the genuine interest in pure
and applied mathematics.

When my high school started two years ago, I was in a period of uncertainty. But when I was
beginning to figure out I am indeed a nerd, I started to strive for being great: learning calculus
before anyone else in the school, creating software better than anyone else's in the school, doing
computer science research powerful than anyone else in the school had ever researched. The price
could not be taken lightly: overly reliance on coffee, some white hairs, and a great disadvantage
for college admission: a nerdy spirit that is virtually impossible to conceal. Yes, it is the time
for college applications.

## 3. From Quandary to Triumph

On July 30, a five-week mathematics course at MathILy had ended; two days later, an eight-day
college campus visiting trip started. The list of colleges to visit had been finalized in May, when
I was still undecided but narrowed my ED choices among Cornell, Duke, and Penn. Initially, the NETS
program at Penn drew my attention since it provided a highly integrated course for big data
analysis. Duke then replaced Penn when I found that only Duke does not discriminate against male
applicants among three schools. However, I eventually chose Cornell when I detailedly compared their
courses in computer science as well their education in mathematics. Therefore, I almost already made
up my mind to apply for Cornell in ED. However, for the sake of increasing success rate, I initially
decided to apply for College of Arts and Sciences or even College of Agriculture and Life Sciences
which has an information science major.

I first researched extensively to distinguish between computer science and information science. I
hoped the research could prove that CS and IS are equivalent or IS is better so that I could have an
easy option. The result did the opposite. Now I was left with only one option: College of Arts and
Sciences, where none from my high school had ever been admitted into. While I finalized my own
research, my parent came up with a completely different idea: applying for NETS program in Penn
Engineering. We all knew that Penn is significantly harder to get into. We also knew that I was
willing to take the risk since I would be very comfortable to be admitted into UC Berkeley in case I
failed the ED. Thus, it was not the choice between risk and safety. My mom's message came in during
the last week of MathILy course. She cannot elaborate on her points simply by chat, so we all agreed
to have it settled after those campus visit. Suddenly, the visiting, which was only supposed to be a
confirmation when I initially chose Cornell, became a contest and a source of debate. The topic of
the debate was fairly simple: Cornell is a better choice than Penn. The affirmative side stands the
nerdy Sam; the negative side stands, as I later discovered, the whole world. The evidence to either
prove or disprove the claim will be carefully collected on August 1 and August 3 when we would visit
Cornell and Penn respectively as scheduled.

On August 1, we first arrived at the information session of College of Arts and Sciences. It was the
first info session, so I was busy taking down notes for the source of my application essays. After
the information session, I specifically asked the lecturer to tell the difference between computer
science and information science to ensure my judgment is correct. It is. He said that information
science is more of an integrated subject, while computer science is more rigorous and theoretical.
It is basically another version of the statement I found on Reddit: information science is for those
who fail computer science. While I knew I am more of a nerd less of a businessman, I have to study
computer science instead of the information science to sharpen my ability to make great things. Now
the easiest path had been completely eliminated. I have to take the risk. Then we went to the info
session of College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, in which I almost fell asleep. Besides these
two colleges, I also registered for the info session of College of Engineering, although I thought I
had almost no chance of getting in.

The registration of this info session, initially for utilizing the time between an info session and
campus tour, proved to be one of the most important decisions from the hindsight. When the lecturer
walked into the auditorium, his first sentence was not "Welcome to Cornell" or "Welcome to Cornell
Engineering". Instead, it was "Welcome to organic chemistry." From that instant, I knew it was the
place I would like: a bit nerdy, openly nerdy, and proudly nerdy. In the middle of the session, when
the lecturer was explaining who should apply for Cornell Engineering, he stated the motto of
engineering students: "I love math and science. I love problem-solving." It was a direct hit since
even the nerdier CMU did not say these words in such an open manner. OK. College of Engineering was
significantly harder to get in. Boys were discriminated the most in the application. However, I
would love to take the risk. I remembered that I took two potentially life-changing gambles
previously. The first time was in December 2015, when I refused to take the new SAT and concentrated
all my effort on the old one. The second was in May 2016, when I did not renounce when weeks of
research in machine learning only produced meaningless data. I narrowly won the previous two. Now
there should be a third one.

However, it was just the interpretation from my perspective. My mom was still thinking of ways to
persuade me to apply for Penn. From her perspective, Penn had a better reputation among the Ivy
League and NETS had a better course system that gave me a well-rounded education. She also believed
that the business environment at Penn can convert a nerd like me into someone else. What she
appreciated was exactly the reason I preferred Cornell to Penn, so our discussion was not even on
the same page. On August 3, the disparity became more obvious. I had to admit that Penn did a very
good job in the information session: well-controlled light effect, wonderful speech with historical
and cultural significance, and discussions on the imagination and beautiful dreams. However, they
were exactly the same things I did not care about. To make it worse, it reminded me of the
unsubstantial and platitudinous speech delivered by the ministers of the student union. I did not
want to be a member of student union; I belong to the nerdy Computerization. The same logic should
apply to Penn and Cornell.

For me, the decision was already made, but it took another three weeks to debate on which school is
better. Everyone tried to persuade me: some believed that I deserve a better school as if Cornell
Engineer was easy to get in without two successive AMC 1%; some repeated the same talk on
reputation; others focused on the courses. I was not persuaded, just like I was not persuaded to
remain in the student union, to research on simpler topics instead of complex ones, or to be a
businessman and not to be a nerd. On August 24, I produced the first salvageable draft of Cornell
Engineering Supplement essay. In the essay, I proudly wrote about the middle school incident and the
horrible research experience without help. I mentioned the loneliness as a nerd in an overwhelming
environment for future businessmen and businesswomen. I quoted exactly the same words "I love math
and science. I love problem-solving." The act of writing the essay itself and the content of the
essay perfectly demonstrated my determination, and more importantly, my Nerd Pride. There were no
more debates. The decision was officially finalized.

## 4. The End

Three months later, at 0:01 AM in Beijing Time on December 9, six hours prior to the official
release of Cornell's decision, I was still unable to sleep. I woke up from a bad sleep at 4 o'clock,
then started to read mathematical proofs to relieve my stress and to pass the most nervous two
hours. At 6:01 AM in Beijing Time or 5:01 PM in Eastern Standard Time, I finished reading the proof
of Gaussian Integral and refreshed the web page.

Everything has a beginning has an end. I prefer to end with the ending of my Cornell Engineering
essay: "My journey in artificial intelligence has only just begun and I hope my next steps in that
journey are taken at Cornell."

![Letter of Acceptance from Cornell Engineering](/img/2016-12-30-nerd-pride/acceptance.png) Letter
of Acceptance from Cornell Engineering
